Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Jaap de Hod. He
is Samuel C. Dobbs, Professor in the Department of
Biology at Emory University, and today we're talking about
his book, Doctors by Nature How Ants, Apes, and
Other Animals Heal Themselves. So, Doctor Duhode, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thanks so much for having me.
OK, so what is the premise of the book?
I mean, uh, what do you explore there exactly
in terms of how animals can produce, I guess,
and use their own medicines.
That's right, yeah, so I'm just, um, you know,
what, what I like about the book is like
just the pictures of animals and, uh, and that's
really where, where it comes from. It's a fascination
with nature and with animals and Humans have a
tendency to think they are special and, and especially
people in Western societies love the idea that we're
separate from nature and we have, we do things
that other species cannot do. And so for a
long time, we thought that humans are the only
species that can use medicine and now we know
that a lot of different animals can use medicines
as well. So the book is really about Uh,
all the evidence we have right now for all
sorts of animals from ants to apes that use
medicines, that, that use drugs from nature to heal
themselves or even heal each other. And also the
lessons we can learn from that because it turns
out that animals have some really cool medical know-how
that we can learn from, that we have learned
from, and that we can actually learn from even
today and in the future to treat better our
own. Uh, PETS and our livestock, honey bees, but
also discover drugs that we can use for ourselves.
But how do we determine that a particular species
or a particular animal uses a natural product as
medicine? What counts as medicine?
That's a really good question and. Defining medicine is
actually really difficult. And when I was writing the
book, I actually tried to write a chapter on
what is medicine, and in the end, that chapter
didn't make it in the book. It was too
confusing. Um, IF you ask, you know, anyone around
you, you know, to define medicine, everyone is going
to give a different answer. So what I focused
the book on is talking about medication, using medicines
or drugs. So I use medicines, drugs, as, as
the same thing. Basically, compounds or chemicals that you
can get from the environment, um, whether it's plants
or fungi or animals, minerals that animals use or
humans use to treat their infections. And so that's
the other thing I really focused on is infectious
diseases, whether it's bacteria or viruses, worms, uh, protozoans.
Basically things that make you sick. And so, Then
really what it comes down to is finding the
evidence that an animal uses a compound from the
environment when it is sick or to prevent it
from being sick, um, and that you can then
demonstrate that that compound actually has activity against the
parasites or the pathogens that it is infected with,
and that it intentionally uses them. Only when it's
needed. And so that is the, that those are
some of the criteria. And when you do that,
um, you can apply that to a lot of
different animals and that's how we have discovered that
apes do it and ants and bees and all
sorts of other animals.
Mhm. So in the book you go through through
4 different ways that animals use natural products to
fight infections and alleviate disease, namely prophylaxis, therapeutic medication,
body anointing, and fumigation. Could you explain each of
them before we go through examples?
Yeah, yeah, and so I, I'd say that the
one that's really the, the kind of the most
um like what we do as when we use
medicines is therapeutic medication, right? So this is the
idea that when you are sick, you go and
use a medicine that then cures you of the
disease or relieve it, relieves the disease symptoms. And
so this is the form of medicine that is
usually the most easy to demonstrate because what you're,
what you're doing, um, and to give an example,
so really, it started with chimpanzees actually in the
1980s. And so what, what primatologist Mike Hoffman, who
works at Kyoto University, he worked together with a
trad traditional healer in Tanzania. His name was Mohammadi,
and they found that a chimpanzee was using particular
leaves from a plant called bitter leaf. And sucking
the juices out of the pith of the branches,
um, and that dislodged or killed parasites in, in
the gut of the chimpanzee. So what you're looking
at then is, is a case where you see
an animal who is sick. It uses a specific
plant in this case or a particular compound that
works against the disease. And then the animal recovers.
Um, AND also related to that, and that comes
back to your previous question, what is medicine, is
that you can demonstrate that there are costs to
it as well. There are side effects. You know,
when you, we use medicines and we go through
the little leaflet that comes with the medicine and
we go to the pharmacy. It's all, all sorts
of side effects and you see that in animals
too. So, therapeutic medication is really the use of
medicines when you are already sick and you use
the medicines to treat that disease. And, and it
doesn't have to be yourself, so animals can also
do that to each other. Um, PROPHYLAXIS is kind
of preventative, and so this is the kind of
thing that, you know, when I travel to a
country where there is a lot of malaria, I
take prophylaxis. I start taking my anti-malarial tablets even
before I go, right? And because the risk of
becoming infected is so high that it's worth taking
the medicine despite the side effects, um. Even before
you go, because you know you're very likely to
get the disease. So animals do this too. It's
a little bit harder to demonstrate, right? Because when
you see an animal that is sick and it
changes its behavior, now it uses a particular compound
and it, it recovers, that's easier to demonstrate. But
we have a lot of examples of, of prophylaxis
and um some of them, for example, there, there
are particular primates that live in areas where there
is a lot of infectious with, with worms and
they start eating berries that have a lot of
toxins and they only do it in the areas
where there is a very high infection risk. And
so that is an example of, of prophylaxis. Body
anointing, that is, so anointing in, in human cultures
often has the connotation of, uh, you know, religion,
so you get anointed, and, you know, in, in
religion or, you know, the Queen of England or
the King of England gets anointed during the, the
ceremony. But it's also the use of repellents that
you smear into your skin or into your hair.
So when we apply mosquito spray, when we want
to prevent from being bitten by mosquitoes, that's anointing.
And animals do that too. And so there are
examples of lemurs and capuchins, and they use all
sorts of things, um, including sometimes they steal the
mosquito repellent from humans and start smearing it in
their own fur, um, but more naturally, what they
do is they use plants or even millipedes. So,
some millipedes produce really toxic, uh, substances that toxic
liquids that the millipedes use to protect themselves against
predators. And what the lemurs and, and capuchins do
is they, they grab the millipedes, start pulling them
apart, and then, then smear all those liquids in
their fur and also in the fur of each
other, and that stops them from being bitten by
mosquitoes and butterflies. So that's annoying thing. And then
the final one, like you mentioned is fumigation and
so this is You know, say you have an
infestation of, of parasites in your house and, you
know, where I live in Atlanta, there, there are
quite a few, you know, houses where you may
find cockroaches, for example. They are very, very common
here in Atlanta, Georgia. And so people may actually
call pest control and they come around and, and
fumigate your house to try to get rid of
those. And, you also see it as part of
mosquito control in a lot of different places where
they actually come in and, and mist your house
with the mosquito spray. So that's basically creating this
gas that then kills the, the things that make
you sick or prevent them from coming in. And
so, animals do this too, and so birds do
this often by putting Plants in their nests, very
volatile, uh, plants with volatile chemicals that smell very
strongly. Some even use cigarettes and put those in
their nests and that keeps all sorts of parasites
away, whether that's uh mites or lice or ticks,
things that eat blood of the, the chicks, and
that is a way to, to prevent that from
happening.
Mhm. OK, so you've already mentioned a few examples
of each of these different kinds of uh therapeutic
approaches that other animals use, but uh let me
ask you about some specific examples that you go
through in the book. So when it comes to
prophylaxis, you talk about Japanese monkeys that eat antiparasitic
plants in areas with parasites. So could you tell
us about that?
Yeah, so that is, um, and like I said
earlier, prophylaxis is often a little bit harder to,
to demonstrate. But so what, what people often do,
and this was in the, indeed, when, when you
look across Japan, there is a lot of, there's
a very big gradient in the environment, um, in
the climate, but also in the amount of parasites
that the animals encounter. And so what researchers did
is, is really look at all those different populations
of those Japanese monkeys and find that in areas
where they're more likely to become infected, they use
more of those, um. Uh, TOXIC plants that work
against those parasites. Um, AND that's similar to other
species of primate in Africa that I mentioned earlier
where they live in areas with a lot of
infection risk. They eat more of the berries that
can kill some of the parasitic worms.
Mhm. And an example of therapeutic medication is wooly
bear caterpillars that use toxic alkaloids to kill parasitic
fly maggots. Tell us about
that. That's a great story. So, you know, it's,
it's a great story in so many ways. First
of all, the, the, the, the, the parasites, in
this case, we're talking about a parasitoid fly. And
so what parasitoid flies do, they lay their eggs
on the caterpillars and then the maggots hatch out
and they eat their way into the insides of
the caterpillar. And then they grow and eat up
the tissues of the caterpillar and they're, they're very
clever in the sense that they, they don't eat
the You know, the critical organs, so the caterpillar
keeps living and eating, and so these maggots develop.
And when the maggots are ready to pupate themselves,
to turn into an adult fly, they eat their
way out of the caterpillar and basically at that
point, the caterpillar dies. So they kind of burst
out of the, the caterpillar and it's reminiscent of
the, the alien movie where you had the alien,
you know, jumping out of, of the captain's stomach
and um. You see, I, I'm, I'm, I'm smiling
because You know, when you study parasites, you, you
start appreciating them. So it's, it's, it's ultimately gross,
but it's also extremely fascinating. So, you know, I,
I, I give, I, I definitely give love to
the, to the victims, but I also give love
to the, to the parasites and, and then you
probably see that in the book as well. But
um, yeah, and so what happens, so these wooly
bear caterpillars. They can eat, unlike a lot of
other caterpillars, they can actually eat a lot of
different, different species of plant, and some of those
plants contain alkaloids, and when they eat enough of
those alkaloids, that actually kills the parasitoid flies. And
it turns out that when they are infected, they
prefer to eat food that is high in alkaloids,
and that then kills those flies. And, but it's
really the, the story is so much cooler because
what researchers also did, they They stuck tiny little
electrodes in the taste buds of the caterpillars. So
it turns out those caterpillars have 4 different taste
buds, and one of those is specifically reacting to
those alkaloids. So they have one taste bud that
specifically tastes alkaloids, and when they put electrodes in
those and then looked at infected and uninfected caterpillars,
and they exposed them to the alkaloids, they saw
that those taste buds. In caterpillars that were infected
started responding much more strongly. And so what that
means is that when the caterpillars are infected, the
alkaloids taste really good, and that's why they eat
more and then they eat enough to kill the
flies. And so it's a really beautiful example, not
just of what they do, but how they do
it and how the body tells them, you know,
eat these alkaloids, they taste good, they're good for
you.
Yeah, when it comes to body anointing, one of
the, one of the examples you give in the
book is the one of lemurs that rub anti-parasitic
substances into their fur to deter parasites like lice,
mites, and mosquitoes, right?
That's right. And you know, and, and I, and
I will say it is very Um, it's a
really nice example. We're not 100% sure yet that
they really do adjust for the medicine part, because
what you see these lemurs and the capuchins do,
they, you know, they, they kind of go in
this trance. They really enjoy it and, and And
also what they do is they do it to
each other. So they start rubbing the, the millipedes
or the other substances into each other's fur. So
it also has a social function, right? So we
don't know. Maybe they do it because it's fun
and it, it creates these social bonds, um, like,
you know, people may go to the, to the
pub at night and share a beer and, you
know, as a social thing. And so it could
be that they do it for fun and social
interactions and a, and a side effect is that
it also prevents against infection or, you know, it's,
it's both of them and that's something that we
don't know 100% yet.
Mhm. And finally, when it comes to fumigation, tell
us about the example of birds that line their
nests with aromatic plants to kill mites, ticks, and
lice.
Yeah, so this was. Well recognized. So in the
1980s, there was the time when, um, when I
said earlier, Mike Hoffman and Mohammadi, when they discovered
that chimpanzees can use therapeutic medication. The 1980s, people
also realized that a lot of birds put these
aromatic plants into their, their nests and So there
were a lot of different hypotheses for why they
did it, but some people said they probably do
it to keep parasites away. And so then you
can do experiments and see where, you know, if
the birds collect more of the plants that they
end up with fewer parasites. But really the best
evidence for That kind of fumigation has come more
recently from studies in Mexico City where researchers found
that birds, and in this case it's finches and
sparrows, that they line their nests with cigarette butts
and it's, it's a really interesting story. Um, AND
so, Monte Suarez Rodriguez, who was an undergraduate student,
actually starting this project, she started her project really
trying to find out what is the effect of
cities and urbanization on the nest building of birds,
and she had this idea that all the trash
that people put in, put out ends up in
nests and maybe it's really bad for the chicks.
And then she found this white fluffy material. In
some of the nests, and she couldn't figure out
what it was until it rained and then she
smelled the smoke, and that's when she realized, oh,
they're the cigarettes, so it's the filters of the
cigarette butt, so people will smoke and then throw
their their, the filter on the floor when they're
done, and then the birds would collect them and
then pull all of all the fibers out and
put it in their nest. And then what she
found is that when the birds have more of
these cigarette butts in their nests, so some of
them have more than 30 of these butts in
their nests, they had fewer parasites. Um, AND then
what, what she did, and that's really cool, then
she did a real cool experiment where she could
actually create or manipulate the nests of the birds
to make them all the same. And then in
some of the nests, she added ticks that were
alive and could suck the blood of the, the
chicks or ticks that were dead or no ticks
at all. And then she would see how many
butts, the cigarette butts, the birds would collect and
finally when there's live ticks, they collect a lot
more cigarette butts. And so it's a really direct
response to the parasites in the nest and that
helped the chicks. They, you know, they survive better,
they fledge the, the nest, um, but again, also,
it's a medicine and as you can imagine, you
know, we know smoking isn't good. And it's also
not good for birds, and so there were some
effects on their, their blood cells, so it helped
against parasites, but there were also side effects of
the, of the use of the cigarettes.
Mhm. Do the animals know at all that they
are medicating themselves and how can we study that?
Yeah, so that's a really great question. And this
has been the question. Or the idea that animals
know or need to know what they're doing, I
think has really stood in the way of our
progress in understanding animals using medicine. And even in
the 1980s when Mohammadi and, and Hoffmann, when they
really first described the experiments with chimpanzees, a lot
of people just didn't believe it. And scientists were
really skeptical and they said there is just no
way that, that animals can do this. And You
know, then people slowly started accepting it and, and
they could because they said, well, chimpanzees are very
much like humans, right? And even with my own
work, when I started looking at this in monarch
butterflies, there were so many people who said, there's
just no way. They, they, they're not smart enough,
they don't have the capacity to do this. So,
my, my response to do they know? Maybe some
of them. I think a lot of them don't.
Not in the way that we know what we're
doing. Um, BUT I gave you the example of
the, the wooly bear caterpillars, and it's so cool,
right? Because you, you have a case there where
the caterpillar is infected and then the body tells
the caterpillar, eat these alkaloids because they taste good,
right? The caterpillar doesn't need to know it's infected.
The caterpillar doesn't need to know that the alkaloids
are going to help. Um, ALL it needs to
know is that if I eat alkaloids, you know,
they taste good. And so I think there's this
In a way, different levels of knowledge, right? So
when we think, does some, someone know, we think
about using our, you know, big brain and really
thinking about, oh, I'm gonna use this because I
know it's going to help me and I know
that because there have been trials and the doctors
told me and everything. But I think there's also
a lot of things, even humans, a lot of
things we do without thinking about it. Um, AND
so I think for most animals, they probably don't
know they're using the medication and But that doesn't
mean they're not using it. Um, THEY'RE using medicine,
it helps them, but they don't have to be
aware, consciously aware of what they're doing.
Mhm. And are these behaviors learned or innate in
some way?
So they can be both, and so again with
the wooly bear caterpillars, they don't learn it. It's
their, their body telling them this tastes good, eat
it. There are also a lot of animals that
can learn and really good experiments from sheep and
goats. There's been really wonderful research at Utah State
University for many decades now, where people have done
experiments with sheep and with goats and cattle. And
what you can do is, um, for example, what,
what they can do is they have sheep that
are infected with worms or not, give them different
foods, and then They, they realize, or, or, you
know, some of the foods in this case, it's
particular food with tannins. Tannins are the chemicals um
that a lot of plants produce. If, if you're
a fan of red wine and, you know, you
have kind of that like that, that stringent that
the feeling that your mouth kind of gets sucked
together, that's the, that's the effect of tannins. And
the, um, so, so. Goats and sheep don't like
those, but when they eat that, when they're infected,
what happens is actually, it helps them clear parasitic
worms in their guts. And now they have made
that association. And so the next time they have
the symptoms of the parasites, they will specifically choose
that food when they are given the choices. And
so that means they have learned from their experience,
they have learned through association. They associated the consumption
of particular plants with recovery from this disease, and
so they'll use it next time. So that's individual
learning. Um, BUT coming back to your earlier question,
do they need to know what they're doing? And
the answer is no. They're making that association. They
don't know what is in the food. They don't
know that they have worms, but they, what they
know is they have discomfort, right? They have symptoms
of infection, and they, their body has learned that
by eating particular plants that discomfort disappears and You
know, so, so even, and, and, and, and the
researchers have shown that even but you can create
these associations when the animals are under anesthesia. So
you can put them to sleep. And then give
them particular foods and, and that relief relieve symptoms
or not, and then the animal learns it. So
the animal doesn't even have to be awake to
learn it. It's, it's really the body learning it,
right? So, again, it comes with the question, with
individual learning, do they know it? They don't have
to know it. They don't have to be consciously
aware.
Mhm. Uh, Tell us about your research on monarch
butterflies and how they use milkweeds against parasites.
Sure, yeah. So I Came to monarch butterflies in
2005 and I always like telling people, I don't
study monarch butterflies because they're pretty, but because they
become sick. And you know, monarch butterflies are very
famous. They're very pretty and they migrate thousands of
miles or, or kilometers either way, thousands um from
Canada and the United States down to Mexico every
fall. So they're really, really impressive creatures. They're I,
I was interested because they become infected and they
become infected with a parasite that is a little
bit like the malaria parasites that infect us, the
same general group of protozoan parasites. Um, AND those
parasites can make the monarchs very sick, so, The
monarchs get infected with these parasites. They grow into
tissues and then ultimately they essentially poke little holes
in the abdomen of the adult butterfly that sometimes
it gets stuck in the pupal case. If not,
they kind of can die really quickly from dehydration.
They cannot fly very well, so it's a very
detrimental parasite. And so this is what I was
really interested in and Monarch butterflies, unlike the wooly
bear caterpillars that we mentioned, monarch butterflies are very
much specialized on milkweeds, so they can only eat
milkweeds as caterpillars, but they can eat multiple species.
So in North America, we have about 30 species
that they can use, and those species vary in
the concentrations of toxic chemicals called cardenolides, and these
are the, the chemicals. If, you know, if we
eat milkweeds, some species would be OK, but I
always tell my students don't eat milkweed because they
have evolved these chemicals to kill and so, you
know, those chemicals actually can stop our heart, so
it's really bad. But monarchs are, are mostly resistant
to these chemicals and um So when I first
started working on the monarchs and growing the milkweeds,
and I'm really thinking about the different types of
milkweeds that the monarchs use, for me it was
a very logical question to ask if the different
milkweeds with different concentrations, if, if some of the
plants that have really high concentrations of these chemicals,
if they could work against the parasites. And so
then we did experiments where we had monarchs that
we reared in the lab on the different species
of milkweed, the monarchs were infected or not, and
then I found that the monarchs, when they eat
plants with high concentrations of these cardenolites, so more
toxic plants, it reduces the probability of infection, so
the monarchs are less likely to become sick in
the first place. When they do get infected, they
become less sick. And so, It was really in
that sense of medicinal. Some of these milkweeds are
medicinal. And then the next question was, OK, well,
if that's the case, can monarchs use this and
when they are sick, specifically use those medicinal milkweeds.
How about apes that swallow lives to dislodge worms?
So that is uh another great example of, um,
so, so a lot of the, the examples we
have talked about so far are really chemical and
so, you know, with the, like I just mentioned,
the monarch butterflies and, um, but, but they, but
they do and actually let, let me tell you
that before I get to the, to the hairy
leaves in the, in the chimpanzees, but um Yeah,
so the monarchs use these high cardenolite species and
in fact when you give them choices, the caterpillars
don't actually make choices, and it's the mothers that
do. So what we have found is that the
mother monarch butterflies, when they lay eggs, when they
are infected, and the way that works is when
they're infected, they pass on some of those parasites
to the eggs that they're laying and then the
caterpillars become infected when they come out of the
eggs. And So, but, but what the mothers can
do is when they have choices, they prefer to
lay their eggs on those more medicinal milkweeds, and
that then reduces infection in their future offspring. So
that's based on chemicals. Um, EARLIER I mentioned chimpanzees
that use the, the bitter leaf plant and use
the toxic chemicals from the, from the plants. Um,
WE have talked about, you know, cigarettes in, in
nests and that is based on the nicotine as
well as other chemicals in the smoked cigarette butts
that work against parasites. And so, but yeah, there's
other forms, and so the chimpanzees, in addition to
using chemicals, they can also use mechanical medication if
you like. So, And this goes back, I think,
to the 1960s. Jane Goodall had already noticed that
sometimes when you look at the dung of chimpanzees,
it has leaves in it that are not fully
digested. And so what that means is that the
chimpanzees swallow leaves and just swallow them completely. Don't,
don't chew them, they don't digest them and then
pass them into their stool. And So the question
then was why, why are they doing that? And
so also in the 1980s and the 1990s, it
was Mike Hoffman and a lot of his colleagues
really showing That's what all these leaves have in
common is they're very rough. They have a lot
of hairs on them. So it's like, it's a
little bit like, like sandpaper and so you, you
can imagine swallowing that is really not fun. And
so actually what the chimpanzees do is they fold
the leaves, so they become smaller and then swallow
them. And then what they found is that because
they're all very hairy, they basically, um, Take the
parasites out of the gut because the parasites, so
we're talking about worms, they get stuck in those
hairs. It's like a Velcro and they get stuck,
um, and then they get pooped out. And the
other thing that the leaves do is because they're
so rough, they, they really irritate the gut, so
the chimpanzees will get diarrhea and really purge those
parasites out of their system and they can use
a lot of different leaves to do this. A
lot of different plants, but what they have in
common, they're always very rough. It's like, uh, yeah,
and that, that's what, what Hoffman told me is
that it's like the Velcro effect because if you
pull a worm off it, it, it sounds like
this Velcro strip. So, yeah, it's a really cool
example of how animals do this.
Another great example that you explore in the book
has to do with bees that incorporate sticky resin
into their hives to combat pathogens,
right? Correct, yeah. So this is a really intriguing
again because, you know, people have known for a
long time that honey bees produce propolis, and so
propolis is a mix of the resin that they
collect from trees and other plants, and they mix
it with the wax and then they make it
into this substance called propolis. And then what, what
wild bees do is they line their whole nest
because wild bees, they would make their nests in
a hollow tree that has a lot of crevices
and a lot of rough surfaces. And they put
this stuff all over it. Um, AND so, and
our honey bees, when we use them in beekeeping,
they do it too. And actually beekeepers find it
really annoying because what they, what the bees do
is they put it at the top where the
lid closes the box and so then you have
to pry it open. So they basically just scrape
it off and remove it all the time. But
the funny thing is that people have used propolis
as medicine for a really long time. So you
can go to some places in South America, for
example, and find propolis on every corner of every
street because people use it for all sorts of,
you know, health issues, whether it's, it's colds or
other things. So people have known it's medicinal, but
no one seemed to think that honeybees use it
for the same reason. So they just thought it
was some kind of cement that they use. Um,
BUT now we know, based on a lot of
beautiful experiments. That the honey bees, um, when they
collect this resin, make this propolis, it helps against
viruses and bacteria, even against those varroa destructor mites,
the mites that are really detrimental to the honeybees
and they spread viruses, um, and, and what is
intriguing too is that, you know, so what beekeepers
have done is essentially Take the bees out of
those hollow trees, right, and put them in these
boxes made of smooth planks, and there's nowhere for
the bees to put the propolis. The only place
they can put it is at the top where
the beekeepers don't like it. But, so researchers from
the United States Department of Agriculture and University of
Minnesota, they have shown that if you just make
grooves in those planks, there's all that space again
for the honeybees to fill up and then they'll
put that propolis in there. And so you can
actually reintroduce that medication by the honeybees into the
beekeeping uh practices that we use. So, it's a
really easy and cheap way to bring back that
medicine and let the bees help themselves.
Mhm. Uh, YOU also talk about animals that host
microbes to help them against infections. Could you tell
us about the example of salamanders that host bacteria
on their skin, uh, that inhibit deadly fungi?
Yes, so we know that, you know, the microbiome,
so basically the microbes that live in our bodies
and on our bodies, we, we just learn more
and more about them and find out that in
many cases they're really important for maintaining health and
that they can also really help against infections. And
so we, we have plenty of examples of our
own gut flora, right, when that gets disrupted, we
may get really big issues with some bacterial infections.
And so we see that, we increasingly see that
in animals too. And yes, so for some of
the salamanders and other amphibians, they, they essentially have
bacteria living on their skin. So we have known
for a while that they have toxins that work
against predators, but also fungal parasites in this case.
And then we didn't really know where those toxins
were coming from, and it turns out that it's
actually the microbes living on the skin that produced
them. So if that gets disrupted, that is, you
know, then they become more prone to infections. And
so that kind of knowledge is really interesting. What
we don't know yet is if animals can use
that as, as medication, right? So we know some
examples of animals eating dirt, um, so whether it's
soil or clay and, and there is different hypotheses
for why they do that. So one of them
is that they get minerals and can neutralize toxins
in their, in their guts, but another hypothesis is
that they do it to obtain the microbes to,
to get the right microbes that protect them against
diseases. And so that research is only really just
starting. So, what we know now is that there
are microbes that they help against infections and the
next step is, you know, in terms of probiotics,
do animals do, do a good job of that
and do they know what microbes to get for
when they need them? And that's hopefully in the
next few years we get some examples there.
So during the COVID-19 pandemic, there were many people
who were bothered by the fact that they had
to socially distance themselves and some of them had
to be quarantined and things like that, but there
are non-human, other non-human animals that also use social
distancing to avoid infecting others,
correct. Yeah, it's really interesting. So, as I said
before, my, my book very much focused on the
use of medicines and drugs, right, but there are
so many other ways that animals also protect themselves
and each other against infections. And so social distancing
is not something that humans came up with, and
we see that in all sorts of other animals
there are Examples in, in bees and ants, for
example, that when they're infected, they start keeping their
distance and so they start interacting with fewer individuals
in the colonies. Um, THERE'S also a quarantine. Um,
AND there's also practices that we would as humans
probably not approve of. So, in honey bees, for
example, when they detect there is infected individuals, they
take them and dump them out of the, the
colony. So, and they won't let them back in.
So that's an extreme form of, of quarantine. Um,
SOME ants actually when they, when they realize they're
sick, they, they leave the nest and die in
isolation. So it's a form of, you know, Basically
removing yourself from the colony to stop, um. You
know, spreading disease. We now have examples of queen
ants that eat worker ants that are infected, so
it's, it's cannibalism to stop the spread of infection.
And recent examples also show that ants can do
surgery, which is really amazing. So they can actually,
when, when they realize there's an injured leg or
a leg that is infected with bacteria or a
fungus, they can actually cut off the leg to
stop the spread of that, that infection to the
rest of the body of the ant. So yeah,
I think it's just intriguing because All these things,
you know, that we use for medical interventions. If
you look carefully, they're out there, other animals use
them too.
Yeah, I, I see, I saw that by reading
your book. So what is the importance of learning
when it comes to animals protecting themselves from disease?
There are many different answers to that, and I'll
start with my fundamental answer, which is that I,
I feel like we We have a duty to
understand our natural role and, you know, for me
that's very easy because I love animals and I
love nature, but I think it's just so important
to understand what is out there and understand animals
for who they are and what they use. And
I think that's also important from a preservation, conservation
point of view, right? When oftentimes when we think
of nature conservation, We think about, OK, we need
to protect the food and the habitat of the
animals. We hardly ever think about, OK, what, what
are the medicines that they need. But just like
humans, they need food, they need shelter, they need
medicine, and so that really changes the way we
think about preserving the right habitats and environments for
these animals. So I think that's, that, that's really
the natural answer. There's also more like a human
application answer, and that is that When we think
about our own health, and we think about the
drugs and the medicines that we use, even today,
most of those still come from nature and most
of that is from plants. So, We can, we
can look at, at the medicines we use. Um,
ASPIRIN is a great example. So aspirin is, is
a drug that most of us have used at
some point in our lives. It's one of the,
the most widely sold pharmaceutical drugs on the planet.
And it's a beautiful little white pill, and by
looking at that, you may not realize that this
was actually discovered by bears to start with because
what bears do when they come out of hibernation,
as you can imagine, lying still for months on
end is not good for your body, so they're
really sore and stiff when they come out out
of hibernation. The first thing they do is they
eat the, the bark of willow trees, which has
a lot of salicylic acid and that reduces inflammation
and relieves pain and everything like that. And people
have known this for thousands of years and so
they started copying that behavior and then ultimately, it
was rediscovered in the 1700s in, in Britain and
then the people, you know, extracted the chemicals and
then later changed that chemical formula a little bit
to make aspirin. But I think it's a great
example to show that. You know, by looking at
nature, we can learn and some of the, the
most important, um, medicines we have come from nature.
And so by looking at animals, we can learn
new things that we can use for ourselves. We
can learn about medicines we can use to improve
the health of our own, uh, pets, our livestock,
our honey bees. We mentioned earlier, the honeybees. Honeybees
aren't doing well. Um, AND part of the reason
is that we took away their medicine, but we
can reintroduce it, right? And we wouldn't have known
that if we hadn't done the research that was
really just driven by, I want to know what
these animals are doing and so you can bring
that back. So it's, it's good for the animals,
it's good for us, and yeah, nature has a
lot to offer that we can still learn from.
And when it comes to animals protecting themselves from
disease, another couple of things that they can experience
is nausea and neophobia, correct?
Yes. So I think what, what is interesting about,
so, so the, the neophobia that really comes in,
you know, about how animals learn what to use
and So most animals are very conservative when it
comes to eating food and specifically new things. And
that is, um, you know, that actually protects animals
a lot against eating the wrong things. But it
also means that, you know, that, that's sometimes very
important when you think about how do animals learn
what medicines to use, what medicinal plants to use.
Sometimes they need that experience from other individuals so
they can learn from each other that it is
OK to eat a particular thing. Um, SO that's
where that neophobia comes in.
Can animals also use food as medicine, and if
so, could you give us examples of that?
Yeah, so that's, you know, that goes back to
the question of what is, what is medicine and
depending on who you talk to, you're gonna have
a different answer, but it is clear that in
a lot of forms of human medicine, food is
important. So one example is traditional Chinese medicine where
the consumption of green tea is a really important
aspect of maintaining health and so, You know, but
there are discussions. So in the literature, so some
of my colleagues would argue that food cannot be
medicine. Others would say that it can be. But
we know that there are examples, there are just
other species of caterpillars, for example, when they are
infected. They don't go and eat particular toxic food,
but instead, they eat food that gives them more
protein and they use that protein to, you know,
pay for their immune system to really um You,
you know, because immunity is a very costly physiological
response. So they use, they, they specifically eat more
protein, so they can mount a stronger immune response
against the viruses they have. So I think that's
a really good example of where food is medicine.
The other thing I will say is that, you
know, the distinction between food and medicine and toxins
is, is one of those. And so a lot
of things that are food. If you eat too
much of it, it becomes, you know, toxic and
somewhere in the middle of maybe medicine, right? So
you can think about drinking coffee, um, you know,
you, you can consider coffee as a food, but
you can also consider it as a medicine because
the caffeine can really help you become alert and
be, be able to do things that otherwise you
cannot do. But if you inject caffeine directly into
your bloodstream in a high concentration, you die, right?
So In some sense, food, medicine, toxin, it's all
on a spectrum, right? So in some sometimes I
feel like we're trying to make the distinction where
there isn't one because it's really this whole range.
Right, uh why do dogs eat grass?
That's a good question, and It's actually, there has
been very little research on this. So it's one
of the, the surprising things I learned in writing
the book was how little people have actually studied
this behavior in a scientific way. And, but what
we do know is from a lot of other
animals related to dogs that they often eat grass.
So there have been over the decades many examples
of carnivores, whether it's mountain lions, lynxes, wolves, coyotes.
A lot of these animals eat grass and oftentimes
when people look at, they, they find either the
feces of the animals or they find vomit and
they find the grass in it and together with
the grass there are parasites. And so oftentimes this
is worms or other parasites that you can find
there. Um, AND what those grasses have in common,
the grasses that all these animals use are very,
very rough. They're very much like the Velcro-like leaves
that we discussed for the chimpanzees. And so, it
seems that what these animals are doing is they're
going for grass that is really, really rough. They
eat it. So probably what's going on, they, they,
they have stomach upset or gut upset, they don't
feel good. They eat the grass and then they
either throw up or they have diarrhea, and that
gets rid of whatever made them feel that discomfort,
whatever made them feel sick. And so when you
look at our dogs, And our cats that of
course are descended from those wild carnivores. They often
still eat grass and oftentimes when they do it,
they either throw up afterwards or they, they, they
get diarrhea afterwards, not always, and they don't, and,
and I think this is actually great because what
it shows is that oftentimes our, our pets don't
do it because they have worms, right? Because most
of our pets don't. But sometimes they do it
because they ate something wrong, like a piece of
Lego or a Barbie head, you know, things that
that they may find in the house and they
eat it and it doesn't sit well, so they
feel that discomfort, they eat grass and they get
rid of it. And that goes back to earlier
when we said, you know, do animals need to
know what they're doing? So for them it doesn't
matter if there is a gut, uh, a gut
parasite like a worm or a piece of Lego.
It just doesn't feel good and they eat grass
and then they get rid of it, right? So
they feel the symptoms and in this case, I
think it's a very innate behavior. They go for
that grass and then they get rid of whatever
bothered them.
Do we have any idea about when humans started
using medication? I mean, I know that we have
examples in the archaeological record regarding Neanderthals and the
specific case of Otsi, but I mean, what do
we know about that?
Yeah, so the The Neanderthals that you just mentioned,
we know from basically a Neanderthal dental records. It's
really cool. Right, so you can look at the
fossils of Neanderthals and their teeth are preserved and
the teeth are often the best preserved parts. Um,
YOU know, we have to really, uh, I mean
you get the calculus, when we go to the
dentist and they scrape your, your teeth, they get
rid of that calculus, that calculus actually provides really
good. Fossil record because it traps all sorts of
chemicals and microbes and they get fossilized. So, what
researchers did is do gene genetic analysis, but also
chemical analysis and they found Specific chemicals that only
occur in, in some plants that humans only ever
use as medicine as medicine and not as food.
So there we go, medicine, food, but things that
we generally don't eat as food, but we use
as medicine. And so that's why they concluded, you
know, around 40, 43,000 years ago, Neanderthals use medicine.
But you know, the question is when did they
start using it? When you look at And animals
in general, we're increasingly finding that all sorts of
animals use it. So, and chimpanzees use it, right?
So I would say probably as long as there
have been humans. So, you know, humans use medicine,
chimpanzees use medicine. Our common ancestor lived somewhere between
6 and 8 million years ago. Um, AND then,
you know, their common ancestor with the other primates
lived way longer ago than that. So I'd say.
Our ancestors used medicine and humans have always used
medicine as long as we have have existed.
But do you think that all hominins who use
medicine?
I would think so. I think all, you know,
the more we look at primates, so we know
all apes use medicine and so a lot of
this started with chimpanzees, but people have looked at
gorillas and bonobos and orangutans. They are, they're all
using medicine. And humans are using medicine. So all,
all the apes use medicine. So I am, you
know, I, I cannot prove it. I don't have
the evidence for it, but I think that my,
my my hypothesis is that yes, all hominins have
used medicine.
Uh, HOW can we benefit from studying the medicating
behaviors of other animals?
Yeah, so I mentioned aspirin before, um, but even
today we can learn completely new things that we
didn't know. And one really nice example is cats
and catnip and silver vine. So a lot of
people who have cats will know that when you
give them catnip or you give them toys that
have catnip chemicals in them, they, they go crazy
over it. They love, they bite it and they
start rolling around and then they go like in
this kind of this ecstasy that those lemurs and
capuchins have with the millipedes. So they really, really
love it. And it's not until, so people have
known about this for A long time and we,
we actually have evidence that they're in some Neolithic
villages thousands of years ago, people grew catnip, and
we don't use it for anything else. So that,
you know, the implication is they use it for
their cats. Um, BUT why do cats like it
so much? So, it's only recently that researchers in
Japan They started looking at silver vine, so silver
vine like catnip elicits this response in the cats,
but it's stronger even than catnip, um, and really
trying to figure out why are they doing this.
And it turns out that the chemicals in the
silver vine, so what the cats do is when
they start rolling around, they coat themselves in these
chemicals, and then with experiments, the researchers showed that
those chemicals protect against mosquitoes. Now mosquitoes are really
bad for cats. Um, THEY suck blood, but more
importantly, they transmit all sorts of parasites again, such
as heartworm, which is really detrimental to cats, and
um, But yeah, so, so what the cats do
is they coat themselves in this chemical. So it's
another example of anointing that we um discussed earlier.
And then the researchers actually really felt bad for
the cats, so, because it's really sad to have
your cats being bitten by mosquitoes. So then they
applied the chemicals to their own arm and stuck
their arms, one with the chemicals, one without, in
a cage with mosquitoes and found that it works
for humans too. And so they patented that chemical
to see if we can develop it into a
human mosquito repellent. Right? So what that means is
that even today, we can learn things from, from
nature and develop things that otherwise we wouldn't have
developed.
So still in the realm of applications, and this
will be my last two or three questions, I
would like to ask you about specific examples of
applications of this kind of knowledge. So in the,
in farms and in the livestock industry, people have
to worry about animal health and that, and them
sometimes developing antibiotic. Resistance. So how can we use
insights into the medication behaviors of goats and sheep
to improve animal health and reduce antibiotic resistance?
Absolutely. So I think it's, it goes back to
the idea, you know, similar to the honeybees, the
way we keep our livestock is very non-natural, right,
unnatural, um, because we basically We reproduce this kind
of mixed ration food where because as humans we
think it has everything in it that it needs
because it's all the right nutrients, right? What it
doesn't have in it is the right medicines and
that is why we have to give them antibiotics
and elmintics that kill worms. And so we just
add that to the food and that creates a
lot of problems with antibiotic resistance. But then the
research that we talked about earlier really shows that
these animals are really good at Not just using
the medicine when they need it, but really balancing
their own, their own diet. And so But the
research has shown us that when you, even when
you, so this was with cattle actually, so you
give them either the the mixed ration or you
give them 4 different foods that actually make up
that ration and like you let the animals decide
how much of each they eat. And it turns
out every animal chooses slightly different ratios of the
chemical or or the foods and that makes sense
because everyone has different preferences and needs. Um, BUT
on average, they ate 20% less because they don't
need to overeat to get what is really most
limiting. Um, SO what that means is these animals
are really good at regulating their own diet and
choosing the medicine when they need it. So, but
the researchers in Utah State really, their idea was
to put all these animals back in a meadow
and then make sure the meadow has all sorts
of different plants, right? It doesn't just, and they
said even if you just have 6 different plants,
and that goes a long way. So rather than
just one type of grass grow different types of
plants, the animals can sample from, um, some of
them can work as prophylaxis, other can work as
therapeutic medication. Um, BUT even they said in, in
more industrial settings, you could provide those different foods
to the animals, right? It doesn't have to be
one ration, but give them those choices and make
sure there are those medicinal plants in there as
well. And so you don't have to rely so
much on the antibiotics.
Mhm. In the domain of beekeeping, uh, how can
we apply the anti-parasitic behaviors of bees there?
Yeah, so the, we mentioned the really straightforward way
earlier on, right? So you can, right now we
have those bee boxes that consist of these planks
that are really smooth and so not making them
smooth and putting grooves in the side so the
bees have some place to put their propolis is
a really important and easy way um to, to
help the bees medicate themselves and that, you know,
then we don't. Have as many problems with the
bees and they're happier and we are happier.
And finally, tell us about how we can develop
bug repellents from compounds discovered by cats.
Yeah, so that's the story that we mentioned earlier
with, you know, the cats that use the silver
vine plants and what the researchers did there is
really extract all the chemicals from those plants, really
figure out what are the chemicals that the cats
find most attractive, and in doing that, they found
a specific chemical in the silver vine that the
cats find really attractive and that when they coat
themselves in that, it stops the, the mosquitoes from,
from biting them. So, you know, then the next
step is to, to see, you know, can we
use this chemical? Does it work on humans? Is
it safe on humans? And then can we start
producing it. So, It's a great example because it's
very recent. It's in progress and I love that
example because it tells us that learning from animals
is not something of, of the past, it's something
we can do today.
Mhm. Great. So the book is again Doctors by
Nature How Ants, Apes, and Other Animals Heal Themselves.
I, I, of course, I'm leaving a link to
it in the description down below. And Doctor DeRod,
uh, just before we go apart from the book,
where can people find your work on the internet?
So I'm on, uh, I've got a website, it's
my name.com, Yaprodo.com. I'm on Instagram, Blue Sky, as
well as LinkedIn, so you can find me in
a lot of different places.
OK, great. So thank you so much for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
a real pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you so much. My pleasure.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoro, and
Hal Herzognun, Machel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloane Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyani Smith
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.